There are also used nowadays, aswell in the schools and in the jists, two swords or rapiers, admitted, and approved both of Princes and of the professors of this art.  for honorable and knightly weapons, albeit they be not used in the wars.  wherefore i shall not vary from my purpose, if i reason also of these as fair as is agreeable to true art.  

to him that would handle these weapons it is necessary that he can as well manage the left hand as the right, which thing shall be if not necessary yet most profitable in every other kind of weapon.  but in these principally he is to resolve himself that he can do no good without that kind of nimbleness and dexteriry.  for seeing they are two weapons and yet of one self same kind, they ought equally and indifferently to be handled the one performing that which the other doth and every of the being apt as well to strike as defend.

and therefore a man ought to accustom his body, arms, and hands as well to strike as defend.  and he which is not much practised and exercised therein ought not to make profession of this art, for he shall find himself to be utterly deceived.

it is most manifest that both these weapons may strike in one and the same time, for there may be delivered jointly together two downright edgeblows on high and two beneath, two reverses and two thrusts and are so rich and plentiful in striking that it seems that may be use only to strike.  but this ought not to be practised neither may it without great danger.  for all that whatsoever may be done with either of them is divided into striking and defending.  that this is true, it may be perceived in the single sword which tries both to strike and defend. 

and those who have taken no such heed but have been bent only to strike being moved either through anger either believing that they had to deal with an ignorant person, have remained thereby mightily wounded.  of this there might be laid down infinite examples which i leave to the intent i may not swerve from my purpose.  

i say therefore that of the two rapiers which are handled the one must be applied toward the other to strike regarding always to use that first which wards then that which strikes, for first a man must endeavor to defend himself and then to strike others.  

of the high ward at two rapiers

presupposing always that either hand is very well exercised as well in striking as in defending this high ward shall be framed after two wats which yet in a manner is all one.  the one with the right foot the other with the left, so working continually that the hinder arms be aloft the former beneath in manner, as when the low ward is framed at the single sword.  

and as a man strikes, he must always maintain and continue this high ward, which at the two rapiers is the most perfect and surest.  and he may easily perform and do it: for while he enters to give a high thrust with his hinder foot although that foot be behind yet it must accompany the arm until it hath finished his thrust and settled itself in the low ward. 

the other sword and hand, which was born together with the former foot in the low ward, remaining behind by reason of the increase of the high thrust must presently be lifted up and be placed in the same high ward. 

therefore it is to be noted that he who means to shift from this ward and strike, whether it be with his right or left foot, before or behind, it is requisite that he stand without and when he would strike he shall first prove with his low sword whether he can find the enemy's weapons and having suddenly found them he shall nimbly beat them back and in the same instant force on a high thrust with the increase of a pace of the right foot from the which, if the enemy (for saving of himself) shall hastily and directly give backwards he shall follow him delivering presently the other high thrust behind, already lifted up.  and this thrust will safely hit home and speed because it is not possible that one may go so fast backwards as another may forwards.  

farther as well in this ward, as in others, the ward may be framed with the right foot before and the right arm lifted  and so contrariwise.  but because there is small force in this ward both in the feet and handes which stand not comodiously either to strike or defend and seeing there is required in the handling of those weapons, great strength and steadfastness i have thought good, not to lay it down, as to small purpose.


the defense of the high ward

the direct opposition and defense of the high ward is the low ward, the manner whereof shall be seen in his proper place.  That which principally is to be considered (for the low ward also, in like sort as the other may be framed after two sorts) is this, that of necessity a man stand with the same foot before as the enemy doth, to wit: if he bear the right foot before, to put forth the right foot also, and to endeavor as the enemy does, to stand without, for of both ways this is of the more advantage and safety.  finding himself therefore without, in the low ward, he must not refuse but rather suffer his sword to the found and beaten by the enemy. for this does redown much more to his advantage than to his enemy's because the enemy carries small force in his low hand where he endeavors to find and beat off the sword, considering it is born too far off from the other: for that which is slenderly? united is less forcible: whereas standing at the low ward, he beset both his hands low near together and sufficiently strong.  



therefore as soon as the enemy having beaten back the sword, shall resolve himself to give a thrust, he must increase a slope pace and with his hinder low sword, drive the enemy's high thrust outwards to the right side, if it chance that he were in the low ward with his right foot before, and suddenly with the other low sword behind ( which was suffered to be beat off by the enemy, because it might turn the more to his disadvantage: for seenig the enemy's sword being slenderly? united, as i have laid before, carried but small force, it was the rather beaten off and disappointed: so that as soon as the slope pace is increased and the said high thrust warded, before the enemy place his other sword also in the high ward, he may with the straight pace of the right foot deliver a low thrust continuing still to beat down the enemy sword with his own low sword, that is borne before: and this manner of warding is most safe and sure : for besides that it striketh the enemy with the slope pace, it does likewise in such sort deliver the body from hurt, that of force the enemy is disappointed.  neither is there any other sure way to ward this high thrust, being so strong, and besides, having so great increase of pace.  

this manner of defence is most strong and sure, and is done with that sword which is furthest off.  yet there is another way that is with the low sword before, the which is no less stronger and sure than the other, but yet much shorter.  for looke? in what time the other defends, this strikes.

therefore in the low ward it is to be noted (when the enemy moves pretending to beat off the sword and there to enter) that then the point of the sword before be lifted up, keeping the hand so steadfast, that it oppose itself and keep outwards the enemy high thrust, and having made this bar, to keep out his weapons then and in the selfsame time, he shall increase a straight pace and with the low sword behind shall strike the enemy in the breast to whom it is  impossible to do any effectual thing, or to avoid the said stroke, for that (by means of the point of the sword lifted up in manner aforsaid) both his swords aer so hindered that they may not safely strike either with the edge or point.


of the hurt of the broad ward at the two rapiers.





















